Update ML train-deploy how to guide (#3598)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/how-tos/train-deploy-ml.md

level: "Beginner"
date: "2024-06-21"
# updated: ""  # When the tutorial was last entirely checked
aliases:
 - "/how-tos/deply-ml/"
cost: "0"
---

> Many machines have access to data about their environment.

Author: ```suggestion
Many machines have access to data about their environment through cameras.
```

> Many machines have access to data about their environment.
> With machine leaning, you can train models on patterns within that data.
> Using the created models, your machines can then make inferences about their environments.

Author: ```suggestion
Many machines have cameras through which they can get information about their environment.
With machine leaning, you can train models on patterns within that visual data.
Using the created models, your machines can then make inferences about their environments.
```

A common use case is **quality assurance**.

> Machines monitor their environment, for example using a camera.

Author: ```suggestion
Machines monitor their environment using a cameras.
```

First, connect the camera to your machine's computer if it's not already connected (like with an inbuilt laptop webcam).

Then, navigate to the **CONFIGURE** tab of your machine's page in the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
Click the **+** icon next to your machine part in the left-hand menu and select **Component**.
The `webcam` model supports most USB cameras and inbuilt laptop webcams.
You can find additional camera models in the [camera configuration](/components/camera/#configuration) documentation.

> Complete the camera configuration and use the **TEST** panel inn the configuration card to test that the camera is working.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Complete the camera configuration and use the **TEST** panel in the configuration card to test that the camera is working.
```

## Create a dataset and label data

You will start by collecting images from your machine as it monitors its environment and add these images to a dataset.

> Placing your images in a dataset will, in later steps, allow you to train a machine learning model.

Reviewer: "placing" sounds a bit stilted.
```suggestion
You will train a machine learning model on this dataset in later steps.
```

Author: ```suggestion
By creating a dataset from your images, you can then train a machine learning model. 
```

{{% /expand%}}

{{< gif webm_src="/how-tos/capture-images.webm" mp4_src="/how-tos/capture-images.mp4" alt="Configuring data management for a camera in the viam app" max-width="600px" class="aligncenter" >}}

{{< table >}}
{{% tablestep link="/services/data/" %}}
**1. Enable the data management service**

In the configuration pane for your configured camera component, find the **Data capture** section.
Click **Add method**.

When the **Create a data management service** prompt appears, click it to add the service to your machine.
You can leave the default data manager settings.

{{% /tablestep %}}
{{% tablestep %}}
**2. Capture data**

> With the data management service configured on your machine, configure how the camera component itself captures data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the data management service configured on your machine, configure how the camera component captures data:
```
I don’t think “itself” is necessary, and it’s technically incorrect I think since the data service captures the output from the camera component? Don’t need to get too into the weeds but I think “itself” emphasizes a technically incorrect point.

In the **Data capture** panel of your camera's configuration, select `ReadImage` from the method selector.

Set your desired capture frequency.
For example, set it to `0.05` to capture an image every 20 seconds.

Set the MIME type to your desired image format, for example `image/jpeg`.

{{% /tablestep %}}
{{% tablestep %}}
**3. Save to start capturing**

Save the config.

> With cloud sync enabled, you machine automatically uploads captured data to the Viam app after a short delay.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With cloud sync enabled, your machine automatically uploads captured data to the Viam app after a short delay.
```

If no data appears after the sync interval, check the **LOGS** tab for errors.

{{% /tablestep %}}
{{% tablestep %}}
**5. Capture a variety of data**

Your camera now saves images at the configured time interval.
When training machine learning models, it is important to supply a variety of images.
The dataset you create should represent the possible range of visual input.
This may include capturing images of different angles, different configurations of objects and different lighting conditions
The more varied the provided dataset, the more accurate the resulting model becomes.

Capture at least 10 images of anything you want your machine to recognize.

{{% /tablestep %}}
{{% tablestep %}}
**6. Label your images**

Once you have enough images, you can disable data capture to [avoid incurring fees](https://www.viam.com/product/pricing) for capturing large amounts of training data.

Then use the interface on the [**DATA** tab](https://app.viam.com/data/view) to label your images.

Most use cases fall into one of two categories:

> Detecting certain objects and their location within an image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Detecting certain objects and their location within an image.
```

> For example, you may wish to know where and how many `pizzas` there are in an image.
> In this case, add a label for each object you would like to detect.

Author: ```suggestion
  For example, you may wish to know where and how many `pizzas` there are in an image.
  In this case, add a label for each object you would like to detect.
```

In the **Data capture** panel of your camera's configuration, select `ReadImage` from the method selector.

Set your desired capture frequency.
For example, set it to `0.05` to capture an image every 20 seconds.

Set the MIME type to your desired image format, for example `image/jpeg`.

{{% /tablestep %}}
{{% tablestep %}}
**3. Save to start capturing**

Save the config.

With cloud sync enabled, you machine automatically uploads captured data to the Viam app after a short delay.

{{% /tablestep %}}
{{% tablestep %}}
**4. View data in the Viam app**

Click on the **...** menu of the camera component and click on **View captured data**.
This takes you to the data tab.

![View captured data option in the component menu](/get-started/quickstarts/collect-data/cam-capt-data.png)

If you do not see images from your camera, try waiting a minute and refreshing the page to allow time for the images to be captured and then synced to the app at the interval you configured.

If no data appears after the sync interval, check the **LOGS** tab for errors.

{{% /tablestep %}}
{{% tablestep %}}
**5. Capture a variety of data**

Your camera now saves images at the configured time interval.

> When training machine learning models, it is important to supply a variety of different data. The more varied the provided data set, the more accurate the resulting model becomes.

Author: good feedback

> Generally most use cases fall into two categories:

Author: I guess you could have something that needs both.
```suggestion
Most use cases fall into one of two categories:
```

- Detecting certain objects and getting their location within an image. Each object gets a `label`.

  - **Examples**: A `pizza`, `dog`, or `person` and their coordinates.

>   - **Instructions**: Capture at least 10 images of the same object, taken from different angles and in different lighting situations. Also capture some images that do not contain any of the objects you wish to detect.

Author: you can't really improve something that doesn't exist yet - so I don't really like that.

{{<gif webm_src="/services/data/label-dog-big.webm" mp4_src="/services/data/label-dog-big.mp4" alt="Add a bounding box around the dog in an image in a big menu">}}

Repeat this with all images.

You can add one or more bounding boxes for objects in each image.
{{< /expand >}}

> Determining a descriptive state about an image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Classifying an image as a whole.
  In other words, determining a descriptive state about an image.
```
Or something—I think we need to use the word classify here in some way to connect it to other bits of the documentation where we usually talk about classifiers

For example, you may wish to know whether an image of a food display is `full`, `empty`, or `average` or whether the quality of manufacturing output is `good` or `bad`.
In this case, add tags to describe your images.

{{< expand "For instructions to add tags, click here." >}}
To tag an image, click on an image and select the **Image tags** mode in the menu that opens.
Add one or more tags to your image.

{{<gif webm_src="/services/data/tag-star.webm" mp4_src="/services/data/tag-star.mp4" alt="Tag image with a star label">}}

If you want to expand the image, click on the expand side menu arrow in the corner of the image.

Repeat this with all images.
{{< /expand >}}

{{% /tablestep %}}
{{% tablestep link="/services/data/dataset/" %}}
**7. Organize data into a dataset**

To train a model, your images must be in a dataset.

> Use the interface on the **DATA** tab to add your labeled images to a dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the interface on the **DATA** tab to add your labeled or tagged images to a dataset.
```
[opt] maybe we are using the term “labeled” loosely since the app itself conflates them

Author: Yep I think a tag is a label. Tagging is therefore still labelling

{{<gif webm_src="/services/data/label-dog-big.webm" mp4_src="/services/data/label-dog-big.mp4" alt="Add a bounding box around the dog in an image in a big menu">}}

Repeat this with all images.

You can add one or more bounding boxes for objects in each image.
{{< /expand >}}

- Classifying an image as a whole.
  In other words, determining a descriptive state about an image.

> For example, you may wish to know whether an image of a food display is `full`, `empty`, or `average` or whether the quality of manufacturing output is `good` or `bad`.
> In this case, add tags to describe your images.

Author: ```suggestion
  For example, you may wish to know whether an image of a food display is `full`, `empty`, or `average` or whether the quality of manufacturing output is `good` or `bad`.
  In this case, add tags to describe your images.
```

Click **Train model** and follow the prompts.

You can train your model using **Built-in training** or using a [training script](/services/ml/training-scripts/) from the Viam Registry.

Click **Next steps**.

{{<imgproc src="/tutorials/data-management/shapes-dataset.png" resize="1200x" declaredimensions=true style="width:500px" alt="The shapes dataset." class="imgzoom fill aligncenter">}}

{{% /tablestep %}}
{{% tablestep %}}
**2. Fill in the details for your ML model**

- Enter a name for your new model.
- For built-in trainings, select a **Task Type**:
  - **Single Label Classification**: The resulting model predicts one of the selected labels or `UNKNOWN` per image.

>     Select this if you only have one label on each image. Ensure that the dataset you are training on also contains unlabeled images.

Reviewer: It’s confusing because the app seems to use “label” in place of “tag” for classifiers. Not sure if you want to fix in this PR.

Author: Agreed. At this point in the UI it is called a label. So I think this is the way

Reviewer: Except for when the UI calls it a tag 😅

Click **Train model** and follow the prompts.

You can train your model using **Built-in training** or using a [training script](/services/ml/training-scripts/) from the Viam Registry.

Click **Next steps**.

{{<imgproc src="/tutorials/data-management/shapes-dataset.png" resize="1200x" declaredimensions=true style="width:500px" alt="The shapes dataset." class="imgzoom fill aligncenter">}}

{{% /tablestep %}}
{{% tablestep %}}
**2. Fill in the details for your ML model**

Enter a name for your new model.

> For built-in trainings, select a **Task Type**:

Author: ```suggestion

For built-in trainings, select a **Task Type**:
```
